README.md, before:

# Canevas

Work in progress...  

This is the source code repository for my Master thesis project on CNV assessment on whole-genome sequencing data. It will serve as a basis for the development of more mature tools.

See also : https://github.com/rick-heig/vcfotographer


## Usage

For installation see below [Installation](#Installation)

The first argument to the software defines the main task subsequent arguments define subtasks or options. Help can be found by running the software without arguments or with only the subtask arguments.

Only the main tools from this software framework are available through the software command line tool, more advanced tools and functions can be run through an interactive Scala session as shown below.

### Extract signals from BAM file

The signal extraction tool will extract the following signals from a BAM file :

- Coverage (read depth)
- Number of overlapping clipped reads
- Number of reads with MAPQ0
- Number of pairs with ends on different chromosomes (contigs)
- Sum of edit distance (mapping errors) between reads and reference
- Sum of reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size smaller than 95% of others
- Sum of reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size bigger than 95% of others
- Number of reads with more than two elements in their CIGAR string
- Number of reads with their mate unmapped
- Sum of forward reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size bigger than 95% of others

The signals are in the bedgraph format and compressed with gzip, they can be directly loaded in [IGV](https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/) for visualization. The signals are on a per-chromosome basis in the output directory.

Command :

```
canevas signal extract --input-bamfile, -b <bamfile.bam> --output-dir, -o <output-directory>
```

Note : When a single letter argument `-a` is shown after a long `--args` argument it means that it can be used instead of the long argument so `-b` and `--input-bamfile` do the same.

### Generate VCFs from BAM file and signals

This VCF generation tool will generate the following VCFs from a BAM file and signals :

- Deletions inferred from insert sizes that are bigger than expected
- Duplications based on the coverage
- Inversions based on tandem orientation of reads in pair

The VCFs are on a per-chromosome basis in the output directory.

Command :

```
canevas vcf generate -b <bamfile.bam> -o <output-directory> --signal-dir <signal-directory>
```

### More advanced tools

More advanced tools will be discussed in ...

This also allows to run other VCF generators or region predictors not yet integrated in the main software argument options.

## Installation

In order to use the Canevas software there are two options:

- Create a docker image and run the application in a container. This is the most straightforward method but only gives access to the tools available from running the `canevas` executable.
- Use the development build, this means building with the Scala build tool `sbt` from source. This allows to use every function and sub-tool of the framework in an interactive Scala console. (also allows to run the `canevas` software as above).

Both methods start by cloning this repository :

```
git clone https://github.com/rick-heig/canevas.git
```

### Docker
A `Dockerfile` is provided in order to generate the docker image.

```
cd canevas # move into the repository
docker build -t rwk/canevas .
```

This will take a few minutes in order to download all the required dependencies and build the software.

Once the docker image is created it can be run in a container with the following command :

```
docker run rwk/canevas canevas [args]
```

In order to work with actual files, load the directories you need as [volumes](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/) as shown below :

```
docker run --user $(id -u):$/$(id -g) -v /some/input/directory:/usr/input:ro -v /some/output/directory:/usr/output rwk/canevas canevas signal extract -b /usr/input/myBamFile.bam -o /usr/output
```

The `--user $(id -u):$/$(id -g)` option will with the same user and group ids in the docker machine than the user on the host. This is helpful so that the generated files are not owned by root:root but by the correct user.

The `-v <host_directory>:<container_directory>` options mount the host directories inside the docker container. The first mount has the `:ro` attribute to mark it as read only, to make sure that nothing in this mounted directory can be overwritten. The second volume mounted is writable, therefore it's best to mount an empty directory from the host so that nothing of importance gets overwritten. If a directory with previously generated outputs is mounted they will be overwritten if the same operation is performed again.

### Development Build

The development sources are in the `canevas/canevas` directory.

```
cd canevas/canevas # move into the project directory
```

#### Running the software with SBT
The software can be run from within sbt with the following command :

```
sbt run [args]
```

e.g.,

```
sbt run signal extract -b <bamfile.bam> -o <output-directory>
```

#### Interactively use the framework tools in a Scala console with SBT
The individual functions can be used and run from the interactive Scala console within sbt :

```
sbt
[info] Loading settings for project global-plugins from plugins.sbt ...
...
[info] sbt server started at ...
sbt:Canevas> console
[info] Starting scala interpreter...
Welcome to Scala 2.13.0 (Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM, Java 1.8.0_201).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.

scala> 
```

Once the scala interpreter is loaded any function can be called :

```
scala> cnv.SamToolBox.getRegions("GIAB/reads/NIST_30x_downsample/RMNISTHS_30xdownsample.bam")
res22: scala.collection.immutable.Map[String,Int] = HashMap(X -> 155270560, 12 -> 133851895, 8 -> 146364022, 19 -> 59128983, 4 -> 191154276, 13 -> 115169878, 16 -> 90354753, 5 -> 180915260, 10 -> 135534747, 21 -> 48129895, 20 -> 63025520, 2 -> 243199373, 18 -> 78077248, 7 -> 159138663, 3 -> 198022430, 15 -> 102531392, 11 -> 135006516, 9 -> 141213431, Y -> 59373566, 22 -> 51304566, 6 -> 171115067, 1 -> 249250621, 17 -> 81195210, 14 -> 107349540)
```

This is required to play with the more advanced tools such as the assembly related tools.

#### Building the executable
The software executable (Java `.jar` archive) can be built using `sbt` the Scala build tool.

```
cd canevas/canevas # move into the project directory
sbt assembly
```

This will create the executable in the `target/scala-<version>/` directory. Which can be run with 

```
java -jar <executable.jar> [args]
```

Commit message:

Updaed doc and added executable generation

README.md, after:

# Canevas

Work in progress...  

This is the source code repository for my Master thesis project on CNV assessment on whole-genome sequencing data. It will serve as a basis for the development of more mature tools. Some of the tools are presented below.

See also : https://github.com/rick-heig/vcfotographer


## Usage

For installation see below [Installation](#Installation)

The first argument to the software defines the main task subsequent arguments define subtasks or options. Help can be found by running the software without arguments or with only the subtask arguments.

Only the main tools from this software framework are available through the software command line tool, more advanced tools and functions can be run through an interactive Scala session as shown below.

### Extract signals from BAM file

The signal extraction tool will extract the following signals from a BAM file :

- Coverage (read depth)
- Number of overlapping clipped reads
- Number of reads with MAPQ0
- Number of pairs with ends on different chromosomes (contigs)
- Sum of edit distance (mapping errors) between reads and reference
- Sum of reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size smaller than 95% of others
- Sum of reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size bigger than 95% of others
- Number of reads with more than two elements in their CIGAR string
- Number of reads with their mate unmapped
- Sum of forward reads within a pair with an inferred fragment size bigger than 95% of others

The signals are in the bedgraph format and compressed with gzip, they can be directly loaded in [IGV](https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/) for visualization. The signals are on a per-chromosome basis in the output directory.

Command :

```
canevas signal extract --input-bamfile, -b <bamfile.bam> --output-dir, -o <output-directory>
```

Note : When a single letter argument `-a` is shown after a long `--argument` argument it means that it can be used instead of the long argument so `-b` and `--input-bamfile` do the same.

### Generate VCFs from BAM file and signals

This VCF generation tool will generate the following VCFs from a BAM file and signals :

- Deletions inferred from insert sizes that are bigger than expected
- Duplications based on the coverage
- Inversions based on tandem orientation of reads in pair

The VCFs are on a per-chromosome basis in the output directory.

Command :

```
canevas vcf generate -b <bamfile.bam> -o <output-directory> --signal-dir <signal-directory>
```

### More advanced tools

More advanced tools will be discussed in ...

This also allows to run other VCF generators or region predictors not yet integrated in the main software argument options.

## Installation

In order to use the Canevas software there are two options:

- Create a docker image and run the application in a container. This is the most straightforward method but only gives access to the tools available from running the `canevas` executable.
- Use the development build, this means building with the Scala build tool `sbt` from source. This allows to use every function and sub-tool of the framework in an interactive Scala console. (also allows to run the `canevas` software as above).

Both methods start by cloning this repository :

```
git clone https://github.com/rick-heig/canevas.git
```

### Docker
A `Dockerfile` is provided in order to generate the docker image.

```
cd canevas # move into the repository
docker build -t rwk/canevas .
```

This will take a few minutes in order to download all the required dependencies and build the software.

Once the docker image is created it can be run in a container with the following command :

```
docker run rwk/canevas canevas [args]
```

In order to work with actual files, load the directories you need as [volumes](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/) as shown below :

```
docker run --user $(id -u):$/$(id -g) -v /some/input/directory:/usr/input:ro -v /some/output/directory:/usr/output rwk/canevas canevas signal extract -b /usr/input/myBamFile.bam -o /usr/output
```

The `--user $(id -u):$/$(id -g)` option will with the same user and group ids in the docker machine than the user on the host. This is helpful so that the generated files are not owned by root:root but by the correct user.

The `-v <host_directory>:<container_directory>` options mount the host directories inside the docker container. The first mount has the `:ro` attribute to mark it as read only, to make sure that nothing in this mounted directory can be overwritten. The second volume mounted is writable, therefore it's best to mount an empty directory from the host so that nothing of importance gets overwritten. If a directory with previously generated outputs is mounted they will be overwritten if the same operation is performed again.

### Development Build

The development sources are in the `canevas/canevas` directory.

```
cd canevas/canevas # move into the project directory
```

#### Running the software with SBT
The software can be run from within sbt with the following command :

```
sbt run [args]
```

e.g.,

```
sbt run signal extract -b <bamfile.bam> -o <output-directory>
```

#### Interactively use the framework tools in a Scala console with SBT
The individual functions can be used and run from the interactive Scala console within sbt :

```
sbt
[info] Loading settings for project global-plugins from plugins.sbt ...
...
[info] sbt server started at ...
sbt:Canevas> console
[info] Starting scala interpreter...
Welcome to Scala 2.13.0 (Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM, Java 1.8.0_201).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.

scala> 
```

Once the scala interpreter is loaded any function can be called :

```
scala> cnv.SamToolBox.getRegions("GIAB/reads/NIST_30x_downsample/RMNISTHS_30xdownsample.bam")
res22: scala.collection.immutable.Map[String,Int] = HashMap(X -> 155270560, 12 -> 133851895, 8 -> 146364022, 19 -> 59128983, 4 -> 191154276, 13 -> 115169878, 16 -> 90354753, 5 -> 180915260, 10 -> 135534747, 21 -> 48129895, 20 -> 63025520, 2 -> 243199373, 18 -> 78077248, 7 -> 159138663, 3 -> 198022430, 15 -> 102531392, 11 -> 135006516, 9 -> 141213431, Y -> 59373566, 22 -> 51304566, 6 -> 171115067, 1 -> 249250621, 17 -> 81195210, 14 -> 107349540)
```

This is required to play with the more advanced tools such as the assembly related tools.

#### Building the executable

In order to build the executable binary file the following script is provided : `canevas/canevas/generate_executable.sh` runnin the script will build the executable file in the same directory.

This requires `sbt` the scala build tool to be installed and that a java runtime environment is present.

The generated executable file can then be copied in a location that is in the system path e.g., `/usr/local/bin`.

The generated executable can be used locally 

```
./canevas [args]
```

or if moved into a directory that is visible in the system path, globally

```
canevas [args]
```

##### Build the java executable
The software executable (Java `.jar` archive) can be built using `sbt` the Scala build tool.

```
cd canevas/canevas # move into the project directory
sbt assembly
```

This will create the executable in the `target/scala-<version>/` directory. Which can be run with 

```
java -jar <executable.jar> [args]
```
